# Title: ScrollStats: a python tool for quantifying scroll bar morphology

# Summary
Scroll bars are elongated arcuate topographic features deposited along the inner bank of a meandering river. As the river continues to meander across the floodplain, the series of scroll bars deposited in its wake is known as ridge and swale topography. This ridge and swale topography, readily observed in LiDAR-derived digital elevation models, contains a visually intuitive record of the river's migration history, and the specific morphology of each ridge may serve as a proxy for the hydrologic conditions under which each individual scroll bar is formed. The relative highground of ridge crests also encourage the growth of colonizing vegetation, as evidenced by the vegetation striping seen in aerial imagery of meander bends, which in turn stabilizes the ridges and mitigates future erosion. While there has long been an interest in the formation and preservation of scroll bars, research into the specific drivers of ridge morphology and what information it may contain is fairly new. 

# Statement of need
Scrollstats is an open-source python tool developed to quantify the morphology of scroll bars preserved in the ridge and swale topography found in the floodplains of meandering rivers. This quantification will allow researchers to investigate the relationships between ridge morphology and the factors affecting its formation such as the hydrology at the time of deposition, river width, channel curvature, position along the bend, and floodplain vegetation coverage.

ScrollStats generates a series of migration pathways (an adaptation of the "erosion pathlines" from Hickin 1974) that trace the paths of migration across the bend from the channel centerline to the most ancestral ridge. These migration pathways are then used to sample the underlying DEM and binary ridge area raster to create a series of 1D signals of ridge elevation and ridge presence from which the ridge's amplitude, width, and spacing can be calculated at every intersection of a migration pathway and ridge.

These intersections of migration pathways and ridge lines form a migrationally relevant grid which allows for the measurements at each intersection to be aggregated to larger spatial scales (ridge-scale, transect-scale, bend-scale). This hierarchical spatial relationship enables researchers to study ridge morphology as it changes over time (from ridge to ridge) and along the channel (from transect to transect) and link these changes in ridge morphology to other environmental factors affecting their formation. This allows for researchers to leverage the morphological information stored in the floodplains of meandering rivers to deduce past events such as flow regimes, meander dynamics, and sediment flux, and potentially inform estimations of future meander migration and habitat suitability for riparian forest development.